---
layout: post
published: true
title: Jumpstart Guide to Ansible
description: Using Ansible to customize an Amazon Cloud9 Environment
image_url: /images/posts/2019-03-23-ansible-logo.png
date: 2019-04-10 09:00:00 -0800
comments: true
categories:
  - infrastructure
tags:
  - ansible
  - cloud9
  - aws
  - software provisioning
  - configuration management
  - git
---

## Introduction

This guide will help you get started on using [Ansible], an open-source tool
you can use to automate and maintain the software and configurations of your
Linux systems, as well as handle custom software deployments.

Ansible is programmed in Python, however you do not need to know Python to use
it. You may need to gain an understanding of [YAML], [Jinja templates], and/or
read the [Ansible Project Documentation].

<!--more-->
In this guide we use Ansible to maintain the state of your local development
environment. After you are done you'll be able to apply what you've learned
beyond your local Linux environment.

{% raw %}

To follow this guide, it is recommended that you setup an [Amazon Cloud9]
environment with the default Amazon Linux EC2 instance. The Cloud9 service is
free, as is the EC2 service to [new Amazon AWS users] for the first 12 months.
If you've used Amazon AWS before, then your cost should be less than $10 per
month as long as you are using a `t2.micro` EC2 instance that is configured to
turn off after 30 minutes of non-activity.

If you do not have an environment setup yet, see the
[Amazon Cloud9 Environment Setup] guide to get started.

This guide also assumes that you have experince with [Git]. This guide is
oriented around the "infrastructure as code" methodology, where all our desired
configurations are stored in a Git repository.

[Ansible]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansible_(software)
[Ansible Project Documentation]: https://docs.ansible.com/
[YAML]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML
[Jinja templates]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jinja_(template_engine)
[new Amazon AWS users]: https://aws.amazon.com/free/
[Amazon cloud9 environment setup]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/latest/user-guide/setup-express.html
[Amazon Cloud9]: https://aws.amazon.com/cloud9/
[git]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git

## Establishing a Git repository

Create a [new Github repository] to store your Ansible configuration. After
you've done this, use `git` to clone the repository into your local environment.

Here's the command I used with my own repository:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:redconfetti/cloud9-dev.git
```

[new Github repository]: https://github.com/new

## Installing the Ansible Engine

Amazon Linux includes Python 2.7 and 3.5 by default. Installing Ansible using
the Yum package manager leads to conflicts, so use the Python 2.7 version of
PIP to install Ansible.

```bash
# Install Ansible using Python 2.7
/usr/bin/pip-2.7 install ansible
```

If you're using a different Linux distribution, see the
[Ansible Installation Guide] for other system installation instructions.

[Ansible Installation Guide]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html

## Ansible Configuration

The default Ansible configuration file is located under
`/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg`. Ansible will over-ride these default settings if
there are any found in a `.ansible.cfg` file located in your home directory, or
an `ansible.cfg` file located in the current directory.

Ansible is designed to be used from a specific machine, designated as the
"management node", that is used to orchestrate the setup and configuration of
other machines. This is why the default configurations exist globally
under `/etc/ansible`.

For our purposes we want Ansible to use the configuration we place in our
repository, so create a new `ansible.cfg` file in the root folder of your
repository with the following contents

```INI
[defaults]
inventory = hosts.yml
```

This will help us to avoid needing to use the `-i hosts.yml` parameter with
our Ansible commands, however it does introduce a possible security risk.
Since we're running an EC2 instance that we're not sharing with other users,
we're not running the risk of another user modifying our `ansible.cfg` file.

Ansible Configuration Documentation:

- [Avoiding security risks with ansible.cfg in the current directory]
- [Configuring Ansible]
- [Ansible Configuration Settings]
- [ansible-config]

[Avoiding security risks with ansible.cfg in the current directory]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#cfg-in-world-writable-dir
[Configuring Ansible]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_configuration.html
[Ansible Configuration Settings]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#ansible-configuration-settings-locations
[ansible-config]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/cli/ansible-config.html

## Ansible Inventory

Ansible is able to manage the state of multiple machines. By default, the
inventory is defined in `/etc/ansible/hosts` using a format similar to an
[INI file]. Alternatively you can use a YAML file to define your inventory.

As you saw above, we configured Ansible to recognize the `hosts.yml` file
located in the root directory of the repository.

Create the `hosts.yml` file with the following contents that defines the local
machine as 'local'.

```yml
all:
  hosts:
    local:
      ansible_host: localhost
      ansible_connection: local
```

This configures a host named 'local' that represents the local EC2 instance
that you're working from when you use the command line interface (Terminal)
in Cloud9.

For more information, see [Ansible - Working with Inventory]

[Ansible - Working with Inventory]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_inventory.html
[INI file]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file

## Ansible Ad-Hoc Commands

Ansible is designed to connect to hosts configured in your inventory file using
SSH key authentication. Because we're configured to connect to our local
system, we do not have to worry about SSH connections or configuration.

Ansible can be used to perform checks against hosts using a single command
line command, known as an 'ad-hoc' command.

Run the command `ansible all -m ping` and you should see the following.

```bash
$ ansible all -m ping
local | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
```

If you see the output above indicating success, then you're ready to move onto
the next step.

For more information, see [Introduction To Ad-Hoc Commands].

[Introduction To Ad-Hoc Commands]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_adhoc.html

## Ansible Playbooks

Ad-hoc commands are useful, but playbooks are where we can define multiple
tasks that maintain the state of your system(s).

Much like the `hosts.yml` file defined above, playbooks are defined in YAML
format. YAML is not a programming language, but a format for storing
information. In this case the information is our configuration that Ansible
modules are defined to interpret and apply to the hosts we specify.

A playbook can contain one or more "plays" that applies a certain state to a
group of hosts.

The Amazon Linux distribution uses a package manager called Yum (Yellowdog
Updater Modified). Ansible provides a [Yum module] which allows us to use this
package manager to install and update software packages on the host.

Create a file named `local.yml` with the following contents in your root
directory.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  tasks:
    - name: upgrade all packages
      become: yes
      yum:
        name: '*'
        state: latest
```

Next, run the following command to run this playbook.

```bash
ansible-playbook local.yml
```

You should see output similar to this:

```bash
PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0
```

Now all of the software packages installed within your EC2 instance running
Amazon Linux are updated.

See [Intro to Playbooks] or [Modules by Category].

[yum module]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/yum_module.html
[Intro to Playbooks]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_intro.html
[Modules by Category]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/modules_by_category.html

## Ansible Modules

We just covered a task that used the Yum module to update all the installed
software packages on the server.

Ansible supports many modules that serve many different purposes. You can view
a list of all available modules by running:

```bash
ansible-doc -l
```

You can read the documentation for a specific module by using the command:

```bash
ansible-doc <module-name>

# View 'hostname' module documentation
ansible-doc hostname
```

You can also browse modules online starting with [Modules by Category].

## Ansible Templates

Most Unix/Linux utilities and daemons can be configured using plain text files.
Ansible supports the ability to define configuration file templates that use the
Jinja2 template syntax.

Let's create a file called `gitconfig.j2` to define our Git client
configuration.

```django
# {{ ansible_managed }}
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = {{git_client_name}}
  email = {{git_client_name}}
```

Now update the `local.yml` playbook file so that it includes the 'vars' that
define our git client name and email address. Also add the tasks to output the
value of the `ansible_user_id` variable, and configure the `.gitconfig` in that
users home directory.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  vars:
    git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
    git_client_email: peewee@example.com
  tasks:
    - name: upgrade all packages
      yum:
        name: '*'
        state: latest
    - debug: var=ansible_user_id
    - name: configure git client
      template:
        src: gitconfig
        dest: "/home/{{ ansible_user_id }}/.gitconfig"
        owner: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
        group: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
        mode: 0644
```

As you can see, the 'debug' task allows us to see what value is registered
for the `ansible_user_id` variable. This is useful for troubleshooting
your task configurations when they are failing.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [configure git client] ****************************************************
changed: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=4    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0
```

Now check the state of the Git configuration file.

```bash
$ cat ~/.gitconfig
# Ansible managed
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = PeeWee Herman
  email = peewee@example.com
```

The 'Ansible managed' comment at the top is simply a string that can be
configured in the `ansible.cfg` to inform users that the configuration file
being viewed is configured by Ansible.

`Ansible managed` is the default string for this variable. You can redefine
this string to include the user-id of the Ansible user as well as the date and
time, although this will result in Ansible reporting that the coniguration
file has been changed everytime you run the task.

__ansible.cfg__

```django
[defaults]
inventory = hosts.yml
ansible_managed = Ansible managed, do not edit directly: last update by {uid} on %Y-%m-%d, %H:%M:%S
```

Let's run the Playbook one more time.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [configure git client] ****************************************************
changed: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=4    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0  
```

As you can see, it reports that it changed the configuration file. If we check
the configuration file, you'll see that it now includes the message with user,
date, and time.

```bash
$ cat ~/.gitconfig
# Ansible managed, do not edit directly: last update by ec2-user on 2019-03-25, 06:28:58
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = PeeWee Herman
  email = peewee@example.com
```

[ansible_managed]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.4/intro_configuration.html#ansible-managed

## Ansible Roles

If you placed all your tasks in a playbook, it could get very large and wouldn't
be as easy to manage. This is why Ansible supports grouping your automation
components (variables, templates, tasks, etc) into re-usable "roles".

It's often that a role named 'common' is created to store settings that apply
across all your hosts, such as updating the system software using Yum,
setting the timezone, etc. Other roles are defined separate of the 'common' role
that apply to certain nodes of your cluster or network, such as 'webserver' or
'loadbalancer'. You can even get more detailed with roles named after the
daemons you want running, such as 'apache' or 'nginx'. It's all up to you.

Taken from [Ansible Docs - Roles]

> Roles expect files to be in certain directory names. Roles must include at
> least one of these directories, however it is perfectly fine to exclude any
> which are not being used. When in use, each directory must contain a
> `main.yml` file, which contains the relevant content:
>
> - `tasks` - contains the main list of tasks to be executed by the role.
> - `handlers` - contains handlers, which may be used by this role or even
>    anywhere outside this role.
> - `files` - contains files which can be deployed via this role.
> - `templates` - contains templates which can be deployed via this role.
> - `vars` - other variables for the role (see [Ansible Docs - Using Variables]
>    for more information).
> - `defaults` - default variables for the role (see
>    [Ansible Docs - Using Variables] for more information).
> - `meta` - defines some meta data for this role. See below for more details.

Let's move our tasks to a new role called 'development'.

To get started, establish a directory for your roles to contain the
`development` role, containing a `tasks` and `templates` folder. Within `tasks`
create a new `main.yml` file, and move the Git configuration template into the
`templates` folder.

It should look like this when you're done:

- roles
  - development
    - tasks
      - main.yml
    - templates
      - gitconfig.j2

```bash
mkdir -p roles/development/tasks
mkdir -p roles/development/templates
touch roles/development/tasks/main.yml
mv gitconfig.j2 roles/development/templates
```

Next move your tasks from the `local.yml` to `roles/development/tasks/main.yml`.
Additionally, update the path for the `gitconfig` template so that it is
reflected as `templates/gitconfig` (you don't need to include the `.j2` file
extension).

```yml
---
- name: upgrade all packages
  become: yes
  yum:
    name: '*'
    state: latest
- debug: var=ansible_user_id
- name: configure git client
  template:
    src: templates/gitconfig
    dest: "/home/{{ ansible_user_id }}/.gitconfig"
    owner: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
    group: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
    mode: 0644
```

Now update `local.yml` so that it no longer defines the tasks for the play, but
instead points to the `development` role.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  vars:
    git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
    git_client_email: peewee@example.com
  roles:
    - development
```

If you run `ansible-playbook local.yml` once again, the output should be the
same as before with no errors.

[Ansible Docs - Roles]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html

## Variables

The Ansible engine makes it possible to re-use a role that you have defined
on different hosts with differing configurations. This is made possible through
the use of variables. Variables can be defined in your hosts file per each host.

Let's move our Git name and email address from our `local.yml`
playbook, and place it within `hosts.yml` so that it applies to our `local`
host.

Here we've defined a 'development' group, and have placed our 'local' host
underneath that group. We've also defined the variables that should apply to
all hosts within that 'development' group.

```yml
all:
  children:
    development:
      hosts:
        local:
          ansible_host: localhost
          ansible_connection: local
      vars:
        git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
        git_client_email: peewee@example.com
```

If you want to inspect your inventory for errors, you can use the
`ansible-inventory` command to inspect how Ansible is interpretting your
configuration.

```bash
$ ansible-inventory --list
{
    "_meta": {
        "hostvars": {
            "local": {
                "ansible_connection": "local",
                "ansible_host": "localhost",
                "git_client_email": "peewee@example.com",
                "git_client_name": "PeeWee Herman",
                "repository": "https://github.com/redconfetti/redconfetti.github.io",
            }
        }
    },
    "all": {
        "children": [
            "development",
            "ungrouped"
        ]
    },
    "development": {
        "hosts": [
            "local"
        ]
    },
    "ungrouped": {}
}

$ ansible-inventory --graph
@all:
  |--@development:
  |  |--local
  |--@ungrouped:
```

The preferred way to store variables isn't to define them in the `hosts.yml`
file though. Instead you can create a `host_vars` directory, and then name
the files within it after each host. You can also create a `group_vars`
directory, and then name the files within it after each group.

Let's create a host variable file for our 'local' host.

```bash
mkdir host_vars
touch host_vars/local.yml
```

Next let's move our variables from the `hosts.yml` into our
`host_vars/local.yml` file.

_host_vars/local.yml_

```yml
git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
git_client_email: peewee@example.com
```

This should result in our hosts file being slim again.

_hosts.yml_

```yml
all:
  children:
    development:
      hosts:
        local:
          ansible_host: localhost
          ansible_connection: local
```

### Facts

In addition to the variables that you define, you can also use a feature of
Ansible known as "facts". Facts are variables created by the Ansible engine that
contain information about the host you are logging into... what user Ansible is
acting as on the system, the command line environment, networking, etc.

To get a list of all the variables Ansible collects about our system run
the command: `ansible local -m setup`.

### Defaults

Roles are intended to be re-usable, but it could be tedious having to define
variables for every single value that a task or template might need defined.

This is why roles support defaults defined in `defaults/main.yml`.

To make our role more flexible, let's define defaults for the name and email
address used by the Git client.

```bash
mkdir -p roles/development/defaults
touch roles/development/defaults/main.yml
```

After you've done this, add the following to `defaults/main.yml`.

```yml
git_client_name: "{{ ansible_user_gecos }}"
git_client_email: "{{ ansible_user_id }}@{{ ansible_fqdn }}"
```

To properly test this, go into `host_vars/local.yml` and comment out the
`git_client_name` and `git_client_email` variables.

```yml
# git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
# git_client_email: peewee@example.com
```

Run the playbook once more and see what happens.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

$ cat ~/.gitconfig
# Ansible managed, do not edit directly: last update by ec2-user on 2019-03-25, 19:42:28
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = EC2 Default User
  email = ec2-user@ip-172-31-18-245.us-west-2.compute.internal
```

As you can see Ansible provided our defaults in the configuration file. Now
our role is more reusable.

For more information, see [Ansible Docs - Using Variables].

### Defining Variables in Files

It's worth mentioning that you can also define variables in external files.

You more than likely have some passwords and API keys that you surely don't
want to check into your repository (even if it's private).

To work around this, you can configure your playbook like the following.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  roles:
   - development
  vars_files:
    - ~/.ansible_secrets.yml
  tasks:
    - debug: var=secret_password
    - debug: var=some_api_key
```

Next create a `~/.ansible_secrets.yml` file with the following contents:

```yml
---
secret_password: abcdef123456
some_api_key: A65B90148F091E5F3F7E4DFFECD1B074
```

When you run your playbook, it should reflect the secrets you configured.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "secret_password": "abcdef123456"
}

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "some_api_key": "A65B90148F091E5F3F7E4DFFECD1B074"
}

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
local                      : ok=3    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0
```

Now you can define variables in a file that you want to keep secret, but not
check them into your repository. At most you might want to check in a file
named `ansible_secrets.example.yml` that contains bogus passwords and keys,
and can be copied to `~/.ansible_secrets.yml` and then modified if needed
in the future.

A good practice is to add instructions to your `README.md` file, like so:

````markdown
# Setup

Run the following command to copy the template to your home directory
```shell
cp ansible_secrets.example.yml ~/.ansible_secrets.yml
```

Next, modify `~/.ansible_secrets.yml` to reflect the proper API keys
and passwords.
````

For more information, see [Ansible Docs - Defining Variables In Files].

[Ansible Docs - Defining Variables In Files]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html#defining-variables-in-files
[Ansible Docs - Using Variables]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html

## Ansible Vault

Instead of defining your variables in a file that you keep separate of your
repository, there is an option to store your secrets in an encrypted file
within your repository.

[Ansible Vault] provides support for many commands related to working with
encrypted variable files.

You can run your playbook with a flag to let `ansible-playbook` know that it
needs to decrypt one of the variable files.

```bash
ansible-playbook --ask-vault-pass local.yml
```

You can also place your Ansible Vault password in a file and tell Ansible to
use that password file.

```bash
echo 'my$ecretpa$$' > ~/.vault_pass
ansible-playbook --vault-password-file ~/.vault_pass local.yml
```

You can avoid having to provide this flag altogether by defining the path to
your vault password file in an environment variable (defined in
`~/.bash_profile`, or `~/.bashrc`).

```bash
export ANSIBLE_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE=~/.vault_pass
```

Or if you want to make this a setting associated with your repository, you can
simply add a '[defaults]' section to your `ansible.cfg` that defines the path
to the vault password file.

```django
[defaults]
. . .
vault_password_file = ~/.vault_pass
```

Keep in mind that recommend doing this only if you have a private repository
that is not available to the public, but only to your development team. This
makes it possible for all the secrets to be available to anyone on the team you
give the password to.

[Ansible Vault]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/vault.html

## Ansible Galaxy

Wouldn't it be great if you could re-use roles that others have published?

This is possible! You can install and use roles from a public repository known
as [Ansible Galaxy]. It's also possible to obtain roles packaged on the web, or
published in Git repositories (Github, Gitlab, or Bitbucket).

To do this, create a `requirements.yml` file in the root of your Ansible
repository to store the roles that your configuration requires.

For our example we'll use a role that sets the timezone

```yml
# Install timezone role
- src: yatesr.timezone
```

To install the required roles, run `ansible-galaxy install -r requirements.yml`.

```bash
$ ansible-galaxy install -r requirements.yml
- downloading role 'timezone', owned by yatesr
- downloading role from https://github.com/yatesr/ansible-timezone/archive/1.1.0.tar.gz
- extracting yatesr.timezone to /home/ec2-user/.ansible/roles/yatesr.timezone
- yatesr.timezone (1.1.0) was installed successfully
```

Now that you've installed the [timezone role], we'll need to configure the
timezone we want applied to our environment.

Simply add the timezone setting to your `host_vars/local.yml` like below. We're
using `America/Los_Angeles` to configure the system to use the Pacific Daylight
Time (PDT) time zone.

For other time zone values, see [List of TZ Database Time Zones - List].

Also feel free to uncomment your Git name and email address so that it applies
like it did before.

```yml
git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
git_client_email: peewee@example.com
timezone: America/Los_Angeles
```

And of course we have to add the role to our playbook.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  roles:
   - development
   - yatesr.timezone
  vars_files:
    - ~/.ansible_secrets.yml
```

Let's run a command to output our date/time, so we can compare it to what we
see after reconfiguring our time zone.

```bash
$ date
Fri Mar 29 03:09:26 UTC 2019
```

Now let's run our playbook again.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [development : upgrade all packages] **************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [development : debug] *****************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [development : configure git client] **************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : include_vars] ******************************************
ok: [local] => (item=/home/ec2-user/.ansible/roles/yatesr.timezone/vars/../vars/RedHat.yml)

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for Debian based distros] ***************
skipping: [local]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for RedHat based distros] ***************
ok: [local]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for Archlinux based distros] ************
skipping: [local]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Set timezone config] ***********************************
ok: [local]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Set link to localtime] *********************************
ok: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
local                      : ok=8    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0  
```

Now when we ask the system to output the date, we get the Pacific date/time.

```bash
$ date
Mon Mar 25 21:17:18 PDT 2019
```

See [Ansible Galaxy Docs] for more information.

[Ansible Galaxy]: https://galaxy.ansible.com/
[Ansible Galaxy Docs]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/galaxy.html
[timezone role]: https://galaxy.ansible.com/yatesr/timezone
[List of TZ Database Time Zones - List]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones#List

## Conclusion

I hope this guide has been useful in jumpstarting your interest in using
Ansible. I surely tried to mention many of the things I needed to get started
and start using Ansible.

I hope you're more comfortable with Ansible and find yourself navigating the
officialdocumentation with more ease now that you understand what it does and
how to use it.

Feel free to refer to my `cloud9-dev` repository to get other ideas on how
you can setup your local development environment in Cloud9 -
[redconfetti/cloud9-dev].

[redconfetti/cloud9-dev]: https://github.com/redconfetti/cloud9-dev

{% endraw %}
