---
layout: post
published: true
title: Setting up Development Environment with Ansible
description: Using Ansible to customize the Amazon Cloud9 Environment
image_url: /images/posts/2019-03-23-ansible-logo.png
date: 2019-03-23 12:56:00 -0800
categories:
  - infrastructure
tags:
  - ansible
  - cloud9
  - aws
  - software provisioning
  - configuration management
---

This guide is oriented around the "infrastructure as code" methodology, where
every step used to setup a development environment is stored in a version
control system (Git).

In this guide we'll be taking an [Amazon Cloud9 Web-based IDE] environment
that is configured to use the default Amazon Linux EC2 instance for the command
line environment. The Cloud9 service is free, as is the EC2 service to
[new Amazon AWS users] for 12 months. If you've used Amazon AWS before, then
your cost should be less than $10 per month as long as you are using a
`t2.micro` EC2 instance that is configured to turn off after 30 minutes of
non-activity.

This guide assumes that you already have an 
with an EC2 instance running the default Amazon Linux distribution based on
Red-Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL). It also assumes that you have experince with
[Git]. If you do not have an environment setup yet, see the
[Amazon Cloud9 Environment Setup] guide to get started.

After you are finished with this guide, you should be able to use the
configuration you have established to maintain your development environment,
or automate the setup your environment once again should your EC2 instance
become destroyed.

You can also continue beyond this guide with the configuration of additional
systems to host your websites or other applications, and automating the
deployment of software updates to those systems.

[new Amazon AWS users]: https://aws.amazon.com/free/
[Amazon cloud9 environment setup]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/latest/user-guide/setup-express.html
[Amazon Cloud9 Web-based IDE]: https://aws.amazon.com/cloud9/
[git]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git

# Ansible

[Ansible] is a an open-source tool you can use to install and configure
software on your Linux systems, as well as deploy your own software updates. In
this guide we use Ansible to maintain the state of the development environment.

Ansible is programmed in Python, however you do not need to know Python to use
it. You may need to gain an understanding of [YAML], [Jinja templates], or read
the [Ansible Project Documentation].

[Ansible]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansible_(software)
[Ansible Project Documentation]: https://docs.ansible.com/
[YAML]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML
[Jinja templates]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jinja_(template_engine)

## A Note About Idempotency

Ansible is designed to be used to maintain your systems in an Idempotent manner.
This means that you can execute tasks with Ansible that will always bring about
the desired outcome, no matter how many times you run the tasks.

Ansible does this by checking if an aspect of your system is in the desired
state currently, and only if it is not in that state does the Ansible task make
the required change to the system.

It is possible that Ansible can be used in a manner that leads to ab issue known
as "configuration drift". Refer to [Ansible Idempotency and Configuration Drift]
for more information on avoiding this issue.

[Ansible Idempotency and Configuration Drift]: https://shadow-soft.com/ansible-idempotency-configuration-drift/

# Establishing a Git repository

Create a [new Github repository] to store your Ansible configuration. After
you've done this, use Git to clone the repository into your local environment.

Here's the command I used with [my own repository]:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:redconfetti/cloud9-dev.git
```

[new Github repository]: https://github.com/new
[my own repository]: https://github.com/redconfetti/cloud9-dev 

# Installing the Ansible Engine

Amazon Linux includes Python 2.7 and 3.5 by default. Installing Ansible using
the Yum package manager leads to conflicts, so we'll be using the Python 2.7
version of PIP to install Ansible.

```bash
# Install Ansible using Python 2.7
/usr/bin/pip-2.7 install ansible
```

If you're using a different Linux distribution, see the
[Ansible Installation Guide] for other system installation instructions.

[Ansible Installation Guide]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html

# Ansible Configuration

The default Ansible configuration file is located under
`/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg`. Ansible will over-ride these default settings if
there are any found in a `.ansible.cfg` file located in your home directory, or
an `ansible.cfg` file located in the current directory.

Ansible is designed to be used from a specific machine, designated as the
"management node", that is used to orchestrate the setup and configuration of
other machines. This is why the default configurations exist globally
under `/etc/ansible`.

Fo our purposes we want Ansible to use the configuration we place in our
repository, so create a new `ansible.cfg` file in the root folder of your
repository with the following contents

```INI
[defaults]
inventory = hosts.yml
```

This will help us to avoid needing to use the `-i hosts.yml` parameter with
our Ansible commands, however it does introduce a possible security risk.
Since we're running an EC2 instance that we're not sharing with other users,
we're not running the risk of another user modifying our `ansible.cfg` file.

Ansible Configuration Documentation:

- [Avoiding security risks with ansible.cfg in the current directory]
- [Configuring Ansible]
- [Ansible Configuration Settings]
- [ansible-config]

[Avoiding security risks with ansible.cfg in the current directory]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#cfg-in-world-writable-dir
[Configuring Ansible]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_configuration.html
[Ansible Configuration Settings]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#ansible-configuration-settings-locations
[ansible-config]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/cli/ansible-config.html

# Ansible Inventory

Ansible is able to manage the state of multiple machines. By default, the
inventory is defined in `/etc/ansible/hosts` using a format similar to an
[INI file]. Alternatively you can use a YAML file to define your inventory.

As you saw above, we configured Ansible to recognize the `hosts.yml` file
located in the root directory of the repository.

Create the `hosts.yml` file with the following contents that defines the local
machine as 'local'.
```yml
all:
  hosts:
    local:
      ansible_host: localhost
      ansible_connection: local
```

This configures a host named 'local' that represents the local EC2 instance
that you're working from when you use the command line interface (Terminal)
in Cloud9.

For more information, see [Ansible - Working with Inventory]

[Ansible - Working with Inventory]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_inventory.html
[INI file]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file

# Ansible Ad-Hoc Commands

Ansible is designed to connect to hosts configured in your inventory file using
SSH key authentication. Because we're configured to connect to our local
system, we do not have to worry about SSH connections or configuration.

Ansible can be used to perform checks against hosts using a single command
line command, known as an 'ad-hoc' command.

Run the command `ansible all -m ping` and you should see the following.
```bash
$ ansible all -m ping
local | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false, 
    "ping": "pong"
}
```

If you see the output above indicating success, then you're ready to move onto
the next step.

For more information, see [Introduction To Ad-Hoc Commands].

[Introduction To Ad-Hoc Commands]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_adhoc.html

# Ansible Playbooks

Ad-hoc commands are useful, but playbooks are where we can define multiple
tasks that maintain the state of your system(s).

Much like the `hosts.yml` file defined above, playbooks are defined in YAML
format. YAML is not a programming language, but a format for storing
information. In this case the information is our configuration that Ansible
modules are defined to interpret and apply to the hosts we specify.

A playbook can contain one or more "plays" that applies a certain state to a
group of hosts. 

The Amazon Linux distribution uses a package manager called Yum (Yellowdog
Updater Modified). Ansible provides a [Yum module] which allows us to use this
package manager to install and update software packages on the host.

Create a file named `local.yml` with the following contents in your root
directory.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  tasks:
    - name: upgrade all packages
      become: yes
      yum:
        name: '*'
        state: latest
```

Next, run the following command to run this playbook.
```bash
ansible-playbook local.yml
```

You should see output similar to this:
```bash
PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0   
```

See [Intro to Playbooks] or [Modules by Category].

[yum module]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/yum_module.html
[Intro to Playbooks]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_intro.html
[Modules by Category]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/modules_by_category.html

# Modules

We just covered a task that used the Yum module to update all the installed
software packages on the server.

Ansible supports many modules. You can view a list of all available modules
by running:

```bash
ansible-doc -l
```

You can read the documentation for a specific module by using the command:

```bash
ansible-doc <module-name>

# View 'hostname' module documentation
ansible-doc hostname
```

You can also browse modules online starting with [Modules by Category].

# Templates

Most Unix/Linux utilities and daemons can be configured using plain text files.
Ansible supports the ability to define configuration file templates that use the
Jinja2 template syntax.

Let's create a file called `gitconfig.j2` to define our Git client configuration.
```INI
# {{ ansible_managed }}
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = {{git_client_name}}
  email = {{git_client_name}}
```

Now update the `local.yml` playbook file so that it includes the 'vars' that
define our git client name and email address. Also add the tasks to output the
value of the `ansible_user_id` variable, and configure the `.gitconfig` in that
users home directory.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  vars:
    git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
    git_client_email: peewee@example.com
  tasks:
    - name: upgrade all packages
      yum:
        name: '*'
        state: latest
    - debug: var=ansible_user_id
    - name: configure git client
      template:
        src: gitconfig
        dest: "/home/{{ ansible_user_id }}/.gitconfig"
        owner: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
        group: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
        mode: 0644
```

As you can see, the 'debug' task allows us to see what value is registered
for the `ansible_user_id` variable. This is useful for troubleshooting
your task configurations when they are failing.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [configure git client] ****************************************************
changed: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=4    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0   
```

Now check the state of the Git configuration file.

```bash
$ cat ~/.gitconfig
# Ansible managed
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = PeeWee Herman
  email = peewee@example.com
```

The 'Ansible managed' comment at the top is simply a string that can be
configured in the `ansible.cfg` to inform users that the configuration file
being viewed is configured by Ansible.

`Ansible managed` is the default string for this variable. You can redefine
this string to include the user-id of the Ansible user as well as the date and
time, although this will result in Ansible reporting that the coniguration
file has been changed everytime you run the task.

__ansible.cfg__
```INI
[defaults]
inventory = hosts.yml
ansible_managed = Ansible managed, do not edit directly: last update by {uid} on %Y-%m-%d, %H:%M:%S
```

Let's run the Playbook one more time.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [local] *******************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [local]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [local] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [configure git client] ****************************************************
changed: [local]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=4    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0  
```

As you can see, it reports that it changed the configuration file. If we check
the configuration file, you'll see that it now includes the message with user,
date, and time.

```bash
$ cat ~/.gitconfig
# Ansible managed, do not edit directly: last update by ec2-user on 2019-03-25, 06:28:58
[core]
  editor = /usr/bin/nano
[user]
  name = PeeWee Herman
  email = peewee@example.com
```

[ansible_managed]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.4/intro_configuration.html#ansible-managed

# Roles

If you placed all your tasks in a playbook, it could get very large and wouldn't
be as easy to manage. This is why Ansible supports grouping your automation
components (variables, templates, tasks, etc) into re-usable "roles".

It's often that a role named 'common' is created to store settings that apply
across all your hosts, such as updating the system software using Yum,
setting the timezone, etc. Other roles are defined separate of the 'common' role
that apply to certain nodes of your cluster or network, such as 'webserver' or
'loadbalancer'. You can even get more detailed with roles named after the
daemons you want running, such as 'apache' or 'nginx'. It's all up to you.

Taken from [Ansible Docs - Roles]

> Roles expect files to be in certain directory names. Roles must include at
> least one of these directories, however it is perfectly fine to exclude any
> which are not being used. When in use, each directory must contain a
> `main.yml` file, which contains the relevant content:
> 
> * `tasks` - contains the main list of tasks to be executed by the role.
> * `handlers` - contains handlers, which may be used by this role or even anywhere outside this role.
> * `files` - contains files which can be deployed via this role.
> * `templates` - contains templates which can be deployed via this role.
> * `vars` - other variables for the role (see [Ansible Docs - Using Variables] for more information).
> * `defaults` - default variables for the role (see [Ansible Docs - Using Variables] for more information).
> * `meta` - defines some meta data for this role. See below for more details.

Let's move our tasks to a new role called 'development'.

To get started, we'll establish a directory for our roles to contain our
`development` role. We'll set it up with a `tasks` and `templates` folder.
Within `tasks` we'll create a new `main.yml` file, and we'll move our Git
configuration template into the `templates` folder.

```bash
mkdir -p roles/development/tasks
mkdir -p roles/development/templates
touch roles/development/tasks/main.yml
mv gitconfig.j2 roles/development/templates
```

It should look like this when you're done:

- roles
  - development
    - tasks
      - main.yml
    - templates
      - gitconfig.j2

Next move your tasks from the `local.yml` to `roles/development/tasks/main.yml`.
Additionally, update the path for the `gitconfig` template so that it is
reflected as `templates/gitconfig`.

```yml
---
- name: upgrade all packages
  become: yes
  yum:
    name: '*'
    state: latest
- debug: var=ansible_user_id
- name: configure git client
  template:
    src: templates/gitconfig
    dest: "/home/{{ ansible_user_id }}/.gitconfig"
    owner: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
    group: "{{ ansible_user_id }}"
    mode: 0644
```

Now update `local.yml` so that it no longer defines the tasks for the play, but
instead points to the `development` role.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: local
  vars:
    git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
    git_client_email: peewee@example.com
    timezone: America/Los_Angeles
  roles:
    - development
```

If you run `ansible-playbook local.yml` once again, the output should be the
same as before with no errors.

[Ansible Docs - Roles]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html

## Ansible Variables

The Ansible engine makes it possible to re-use a role that you have defined
to different hosts with differing configurations. This is made possible through
the use of variables.

Variables can be defined in your hosts file per each host.

For instance, we can move our Git name and email address from our `local.yml`
playbook, and place it within `hosts.yml` so that it applies to our `local`
host.

Here we've defined a 'development' group, and have placed our 'local' host
underneath that group. We've also defined the variables that should apply to
all hosts within that group.
```yml
all:
  children:
    development:
      hosts:
        local:
          ansible_host: localhost
          ansible_connection: local
      vars:
        git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
        git_client_email: peewee@example.com
        timezone: America/Los_Angeles
```

If you want to inspect your inventory for errors, you can use the
`ansible-inventory` command to inspect how Ansible is interpretting your
configuration.

```bash
$ ansible-inventory --list
{
    "_meta": {
        "hostvars": {
            "local": {
                "ansible_connection": "local", 
                "ansible_host": "localhost", 
                "git_client_email": "peewee@example.com", 
                "git_client_name": "PeeWee Herman", 
                "repository": "https://github.com/redconfetti/redconfetti.github.io", 
                "timezone": "America/Los_Angeles"
            }
        }
    }, 
    "all": {
        "children": [
            "development", 
            "ungrouped"
        ]
    }, 
    "development": {
        "hosts": [
            "local"
        ]
    }, 
    "ungrouped": {}
}

$ ansible-inventory --graph
@all:
  |--@development:
  |  |--local
  |--@ungrouped:
```

The preferred way to store variables isn't to define them in the `hosts.yml`
file though. Instead you can create a `host_vars` directory, and then name
the files within it after each host. You can also create a `group_vars`
directory, and then name the files within it after each group.

Let's create a host variable file for our 'local' host.
```bash
mkdir host_vars
touch host_vars/local.yml
```

Next let's move our variables from the `hosts.yml` into our
`host_vars/local.yml` file.

_host_vars/local.yml_
```yml
git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
git_client_email: peewee@example.com
timezone: America/Los_Angeles
```

This should result in our hosts file being slim again.

_hosts.yml_
```yml
all:
  children:
    development:
      hosts:
        local:
          ansible_host: localhost
          ansible_connection: local
```

For more information, see [Ansible Docs - Using Variables].

[Ansible Docs - Using Variables]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html

## Role Defaults

Roles are intended to be re-usable, and thus they can be structured to use
default configuration values. For instance, you could apply a role to one host
with a certain configuration, yet apply the same role to another host using an
alternative configuration.

The defaults for your role are intended to be defined in your role directory
under `defaults/main.yml`.

If we wanted to make our role more re-usable, we could define defaults for
the name and email address used by the Git client. Let's establish a `defaults`
directory containing a `main.yml`.

```bash
mkdir -p roles/development/defaults
touch roles/development/defaults/main.yml
```

After you've done this, add the following to `defaults/main.yml`.
```yml

```

## Ansible Galaxy

It is possible to install and use roles that are published in a public
repository of roles known as [Ansible Galaxy]. It's also possible to obtain
roles packaged on the web, or published in Git repositories (Github, Gitlab, or
Bitbucket).

You can create a `requirements.yml` file in the root of your Ansible repository
to store the roles that your configuration requires.
```yml
# Install timezone role
- src: yatesr.timezone
```

To install the required roles, run `ansible-galaxy install -r requirements.yml`.
```bash
$ ansible-galaxy install -r requirements.yml
- downloading role 'timezone', owned by yatesr
- downloading role from https://github.com/yatesr/ansible-timezone/archive/1.1.0.tar.gz
- extracting yatesr.timezone to /home/ec2-user/.ansible/roles/yatesr.timezone
- yatesr.timezone (1.1.0) was installed successfully
```

Now that you've installed the [timezone role], add it to your `local.yml` so
that it configures your development environment to use the
[TZ database time zone] that applies to your location. We're using
`America/Los_Angeles` to configure the system to use the Pacific Daylight Time
(PDT) time zone.

```yml
---
# This playbook deploys the entire setup to the Cloud9 development environment.
- hosts: localhost
  vars:
    git_client_name: PeeWee Herman
    git_client_email: peewee@example.com
    timezone: America/Los_Angeles
  roles:
    - development
    - yatesr.timezone
```

Let's run our playbook again to see this in action.
```bash
$ ansible-playbook local.yml

PLAY [localhost] ***************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] *********************************************************
ok: [localhost]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : include_vars] ******************************************
ok: [localhost] => (item=/home/ec2-user/.ansible/roles/yatesr.timezone/vars/../vars/RedHat.yml)

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for Debian based distros] ***************
skipping: [localhost]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for RedHat based distros] ***************
ok: [localhost]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Install tzdata for Archlinux based distros] ************
skipping: [localhost]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Set timezone config] ***********************************
changed: [localhost]

TASK [yatesr.timezone : Set link to localtime] *********************************
changed: [localhost]

TASK [upgrade all packages] ****************************************************
ok: [localhost]

TASK [debug] *******************************************************************
ok: [localhost] => {
    "ansible_user_id": "ec2-user"
}

TASK [configure git client] ****************************************************
changed: [localhost]

PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=8    changed=3    unreachable=0    failed=0  
```

Now when we ask the system to output the date, we get the Pacific date/time.
```bash
$ date
Mon Mar 25 21:17:18 PDT 2019
```

See [Ansible Galaxy Docs] for more information.

[Ansible Galaxy]: https://galaxy.ansible.com/
[Ansible Galaxy Docs]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/galaxy.html
[Reusable Playbooks - Roles]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html
[timezone role]: https://galaxy.ansible.com/yatesr/timezone
[TZ database time zone]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones

# Ansible Vault

We want to configure our workstation so that we have an SSH key pair
established, ensure that the key is added to our Github account, and that all
our repositories are cloned to `~/src`.

## Ansible Facts
